Re-write parts of AEP-4016 (VPA with In-Place Updates) to align with the new In-Place Updates KEP changes (#7813)
kubernetes/autoscaler: vertical-pod-autoscaler/enhancements/4016-in-place-updates-support/README.md

    - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

VPA applies its recommendations with a mutating webhook, during pod creation. It can also evict
pods expecting that it will apply the recommendation when the pod is recreated. Today, this process
is potentially disruptive as any changes in recommendations requires a pod to be recreated.

We can instead reduce the amount of disruption by leveraging the [in-place update feature] which is
currently an [alpha feature since 1.27] and graduating to [beta in 1.33].

This proposal enables only core uses of in place updates in VPA with intention of providing the
foundational pieces. Further advanced uses of in place updates in VPA (like applying different
recommendations during pod initialization or providing more frequent smaller updates) will be
introduced as separate enhancement proposals.

[in-place update feature]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/1287-in-place-update-pod-resources
[alpha feature since 1.27]: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/CHANGELOG/CHANGELOG-1.27.md#api-change-3

> [beta in 1.33]: https://github.com/orgs/kubernetes/projects/178/views/1

Author: That's a great point, done.

> ### A Note On Disruptions {#disruptions}

Reviewer: In the rendered view, the anchor link doesn't work

Author: Fixed, thanks!

It is important to note that **VPA cannot guarantee NO disruptions**. This is because the
underlying container runtime is responsible for actuating the resize operation and there are no
guarantees provided (see [this thread] for more information). However, in practice if the
underlying container runtime supports it, we expect these disruptions to be minimal and that MOST
of the time the updates will be done in-place.

This proposal therefore focuses on *reducing* disruptions while still harnessing the benefits of
VPA.

[this thread]: https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/issues/7722#issue-2796215055

### Goals

* Allow VPA to actuate with reduced disruption.
* Allow VPA to actuate in situations where actuation by eviction is not desirable.

### Non-Goals

* Allow VPA to actuate more frequently.

> * Allow VPA to operate with NO disruptions, see the [note above](#disruptions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Allow VPA to operate with NO disruptions, see the [note above](#a-note-on-disruptions-disruptions).
```

I think that will work?

There are a few of these anchor links that are broken currently

Author: I think I've fixed them all. Thanks for finding this.

  - `PreferNoRestart` (default) which indicates to the container runtime that it should try to resize
    the container without restarting. However, it does not guarantee that a restart will not
    happen.
  - `RestartContainer` which indicates that any mutation to the resource requires a restart (for
    example, this is important for Java apps using the `-xmxN` which are unable to resize memory
    without restarting).

Note that resize operations will NOT change the pod's quality of service (QoS) class.

Note that in the initial Beta version of in-place updates, [memory limit downscaling is forbidden]
for pods with `resizePolicy: PreferNoRestart`. This means that when VPA will attempt to apply the
patch, it will fail and VPA will need to fallback to a regular eviction (see below).

[In-place update of pod resources KEP]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/1287
[`/resize` subresource]:https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/1287-in-place-update-pod-resources#api-changes
[`ResizePolicy`]: https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/4dccc5e86b957cea946a63c4f052ee7dec3946ce/core/v1/types.go#L2636

> [memory limit downscaling is forbidden]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5089

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[memory limit downscaling is forbidden]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/4c3449517e1a7cf00907fd8a6dc780350275035a/keps/sig-node/1287-in-place-update-pod-resources/README.md#memory-limit-decreases
```

This may be easier to link to?

Author: Done.

For VPAs using the new `InPlaceOrRecreate` mode, the VPA Admission Controller will apply updates to
starting pods just as it does for VPAs in `Initial`, `Auto`, and `Recreate` modes.

### 2. In-Place Updates (**NEW**) {#in-place}

In the `InPlaceOrRecreate` modes, and for updates that require a container restart, the VPA updater
will attempt to apply updates in place. It will update them under the same conditions that would
trigger an update with `Recreate` mode. That is it will apply an in-place update if:

* Any container has a request below the corresponding `LowerBound` or
* Any container has a request above the corresponding `UpperBound` or
* Difference between sum of pods requests and sum of recommendation `Target`s is more than 10% and the pod has been
  running undisrupted for at least 12h.
  * NOTE: A successful update counts as disruption here (and prevents further disruptive updates to the pod for 12h).

(NEW!) In addition, VPA will attempt an in-place update in some cases where we NORMALLY would not
be able to perform an eviction, including:

* If `CanEvict` is false.
* If any of the `EvictionRequirements` on the VPA are not true.

> These additional resizes can be attempted because the eviction fallback would fail anyway.

Reviewer: Just want to clarify this...
So an in-place update will be attempted, if that in-place fails, the VPA will not attempt an eviction? 
Almost as if it was `InPlaceOrNotAtAll` ?

Author: It will attempt an eviction but the eviction won't go through because the actual condition will prevent it from happening. Let me clarify that in the text.

The VPA updater will evict a pod to actuate a recommendation if it attempted to apply the

> recommendation in place and failed.

Reviewer: These two sentences seem to conflict with each other

Author: Clarified.

The idea here is that we can be slightly more relaxed with in-place resizes and still allow VPA to proceed with eviction when the operation fails. The eviction would get blocked anyway since these conditions themselves prevent eviction from happening. Hopefully that makes sense.

## Summary

VPA applies its recommendations with a mutating webhook, during pod creation. It can also evict
pods expecting that it will apply the recommendation when the pod is recreated. Today, this process
is very disruptive as any changes in recommendations requires a pod to be recreated.

We can instead reduce the amount of disruption by leveraging the [in-place update feature] which is
currently an [alpha feature since 1.27] and graduating to [beta in 1.33].

This proposal enables only core uses of in place updates in VPA with intention of providing the
foundational pieces. Further advanced uses of in place updates in VPA (like applying different
recommendations during pod initialization or providing more frequent smaller updates) will be

> introduced as separate enhancement proposals.

Reviewer: +1 to keeping scope limited

> introduced as separate enhancement proposals.

Author: I think the new write-up here has limited the scope quite a bit, PTAL.

[in-place update feature]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/1287-in-place-update-pod-resources
[alpha feature since 1.27]: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/CHANGELOG/CHANGELOG-1.27.md#api-change-3
[beta in 1.33]: https://github.com/orgs/kubernetes/projects/178/views/1

### A Note On Disruptions {#disruptions}

It is important to note that **VPA cannot guarantee NO disruptions**. This is because the
underlying container runtime is responsible for actuating the resize operation and there are no

> guarantees provided (see [this thread]for more information).

Author: Good callout, added some clarification here.

This proposal therefore focuses on *reducing* disruptions while still harnessing the benefits of
VPA.

[this thread]: https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/issues/7722#issue-2796215055

### Goals

* Allow VPA to actuate with reduced disruption.
* Allow VPA to actuate more frequently.
* Allow VPA to actuate in situations where actuation by eviction is not desirable.

### Non-Goals

* Allow VPA to operate with NO disruptions, see the [note above](#disruptions).
* Improved handling of injected sidecars
  * Separate AEP will improve VPAs handling of injected sidecars.

## Proposal

Add a new supported value of [`UpdateMode`]:

* `InPlaceOrRecreate`

Here we specify `OrRecreate` to make sure the user explicitly knows that the container may be

> restarted.

Author: My intention here was to be explicit that we can NOT guarantee the container will not be restarted.

Your suggestion here is good - changing the wording to "**pod** may be restarted".

  modifying a resource value. Currently it has two modes:
  - `NotRequired` (default) which indicates to the container runtime that it should try to resize
    the container without restarting. However, it does not guarantee that a restart will not
    happen.
  - `RestartContainer` which indicates that any mutation to the resource requires a restart (for
    example, this is important for Java apps using the `-xmxN` which are unable to resize memory
    without restarting).

Note that resize operations will NOT change the pod's quality of service (QoS) class.

[In-place update of pod resources KEP]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/1287
[`/resize` subresource]:https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/1287-in-place-update-pod-resources#api-changes
[`ResizePolicy`]: https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/4dccc5e86b957cea946a63c4f052ee7dec3946ce/core/v1/types.go#L2636

## Design Details

Today, only the VPA admission controller is responsible for changing the pod spec.

The VPA updater is responsible for evicting pods so that the admission controller can change them
during admission.

> In the newly added `InPlaceOrRecreate` mode, the VPA Updater will attempt to execute in-plac

Reviewer 2: I saw maxcao13@'s comments and I also feel that it's not completely clear what the relationship between the new VPA mode and the container restart resize policies is. It's probably worth it to document it here. 

For example:
For `PreferNoRestart` resize restart policy, VPA in `InPlaceOrRecreate` will attempt to execute in-place updates FIRST. If it is unable to process in-place updates in conditions X, Y, Z, it will restart/evict the pod to force a change. 

For `RestartContainer`, VPA in `InPlaceOrRecreate` will attempt to restart the container first. Or recreate the pod if the resize fails.

Author: Documented this in a new section, PTAL.

will evict the pod to force a change.

We classify three types of updates in the context of this new mode:

1. Updates on pod admission
2. Disruption-free updates
3. Disruptive updates

**NOTE:** Here "disruptive" is from the perspective of VPA. As mentioned above, the container
runtime MAY choose to restart a container or pod as needed.

More on these two types of changes below.

### 1. Applying Updates During Pod Admission

For VPAs using the new `InPlaceOrRecreate` mode, the VPA Admission Controller will apply updates to
starting pods just as it does for VPAs in `Initial`, `Auto`, and `Recreate` modes.

### 2. Applying Disruption-free Updates (**NEW**)

In the `InPlaceOrRecreate` mode when an update only changes resources for which a container
indicates that it doesn't require a restart, then VPA can attempt to actuate the change without
disrupting the pod. VPA Updater will:
* attempt to actuate such updates in place,
* attempt to actuate them if difference between recommendation and request is at least 10%
  * even if pod has been running for less than 12h,
* if necessary execute only partial updates (if some changes would require a restart).

> If VPA updater fails to update the size of a container, we ignore the failure and try again. We

Author: Yes, all removed now to align with the discussion on Slack. PTAL.

will not intentionally evict the pod unless the conditions call for a disruptive update (see

> below).

Author: Completely changed this in the latest update to align with what we discussed on Slack. PTAL.

> below).

Author: Will resolve this to keep the comments clean but feel free to re-open.

### 3. Applying Disruptive Updates

In the `InPlaceOrRecreate` modes VPA updater will attempt to apply updates that require container
restart in place. It will update them under the same conditions that would trigger update with

> `Recreate` mode. That is it will apply disruptive updates if:

Reviewer 2: Do you mean: if the container restart resize policy is `RestartContainer`, instead?

> `Recreate` mode. That is it will apply disruptive updates if:

Reviewer 3: Yes! My mistake, I've edited the original comment,

> `Recreate` mode. That is it will apply disruptive updates if:

Author: As discussed on Slack, I don't think VPA needs to care about the resize policy, I think it should simply attempt the resize operation if the user set it that way and let the rest of the Kubernetes machinery take care of actually applying the update.

Does that sound OK?

> `Recreate` mode. That is it will apply disruptive updates if:

Author: I added a small section about the interaction between VPA and the `ResizePolicy` setting, hopefully that clarifies things a bit?

## Summary

VPA applies its recommendations with a mutating webhook, during pod creation. It can also evict
pods expecting that it will apply the recommendation when the pod is recreated. Today, this process

> is very disruptive as any changes in recommendations requires a pod to be recreated.

Reviewer: Nit:

```suggestion
is potentially disruptive as any changes in recommendations requires a pod to be recreated.
```

The entire premise of running many pods along with a PDB is to reduce disruption, having a pod die should be something that workloads can handle.

We can instead reduce the amount of disruption by leveraging the [in-place update feature] which is
currently an [alpha feature since 1.27] and graduating to [beta in 1.33].

This proposal enables only core uses of in place updates in VPA with intention of providing the
foundational pieces. Further advanced uses of in place updates in VPA (like applying different
recommendations during pod initialization or providing more frequent smaller updates) will be
introduced as separate enhancement proposals.

[in-place update feature]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/1287-in-place-update-pod-resources
[alpha feature since 1.27]: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/CHANGELOG/CHANGELOG-1.27.md#api-change-3
[beta in 1.33]: https://github.com/orgs/kubernetes/projects/178/views/1

### A Note On Disruptions {#disruptions}

It is important to note that **VPA cannot guarantee NO disruptions**. This is because the
underlying container runtime is responsible for actuating the resize operation and there are no

> guarantees provided (see [this thread]for more information). However, in practice if the

Reviewer: Nit, spacing:
```suggestion
guarantees provided (see [this thread] for more information). However, in practice if the
```

Author: This is a great point.

underlying container runtime supports it, we expect these disruptions to be minimal and that MOST
of the time the updates will be done in-place.

This proposal therefore focuses on *reducing* disruptions while still harnessing the benefits of
VPA.

[this thread]: https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/issues/7722#issue-2796215055

### Goals

* Allow VPA to actuate with reduced disruption.

> * Allow VPA to actuate more frequently.

Reviewer 4: In [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/pull/7813/files#diff-75b57ec58b9bb1f7d8daf972a2b14825c25c8cc49a9e96b44de3175a4ec96529R29-R30) we specify that providing more frequent smaller updates) will be introduced as separate enhancement proposal, so should it be under Goals?

Author: Changed it and moved it to non-goals per our discussion on Slack.

* Allow VPA to actuate in situations where actuation by eviction is not desirable.

### Non-Goals

* Allow VPA to operate with NO disruptions, see the [note above](#disruptions).
* Improved handling of injected sidecars
  * Separate AEP will improve VPAs handling of injected sidecars.

## Proposal

Add a new supported value of [`UpdateMode`]:

* `InPlaceOrRecreate`

> Here we specify `OrRecreate` to make sure the user explicitly knows that the pod may be

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Here we specify `InPlaceOrRecreate` to make sure the user explicitly knows that the existing Pod may be
```

Author: Done.

> restarted.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
replaced.
```

two key features:

* A [`/resize` subresource] that can be used to mutate the `Pod.Spec.Containers[i].Resources`
  field.
* A [`ResizePolicy`] field to Container. This field allows to the user to specify the behavior when
  modifying a resource value. Currently it has two modes:
  - `PreferNoRestart` (default) which indicates to the container runtime that it should try to resize
    the container without restarting. However, it does not guarantee that a restart will not
    happen.
  - `RestartContainer` which indicates that any mutation to the resource requires a restart (for
    example, this is important for Java apps using the `-xmxN` which are unable to resize memory
    without restarting).

Note that resize operations will NOT change the pod's quality of service (QoS) class.

[In-place update of pod resources KEP]: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/1287
[`/resize` subresource]:https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/1287-in-place-update-pod-resources#api-changes
[`ResizePolicy`]: https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/4dccc5e86b957cea946a63c4f052ee7dec3946ce/core/v1/types.go#L2636

## Design Details

> Today, only the VPA admission controller is responsible for changing the pod spec.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Prior to this AEP, only the VPA admission controller was responsible for changing the pod spec.
```

Author: Done

The VPA updater is responsible for evicting pods so that the admission controller can change them
during admission.

> In the newly added `InPlaceOrRecreate` mode, the VPA Updater will attempt to execute in-plac

Reviewer: Typo:
```suggestion
In the newly added `InPlaceOrRecreate` mode, the VPA Updater will attempt to execute in-place
```

> updates FIRST. In certain situations, if it is unable to process an in-place update in time, it

Reviewer 5: (nit - prefer Markdown emphasis)
```suggestion
updates _FIRST_. In certain situations, if it is unable to process an in-place update in time, it
```

Author: Done, thanks!

will evict the pod to force a change.

We classify three types of updates in the context of this new mode:

1. Updates on pod admission
2. Disruption-free updates
3. Disruptive updates

**NOTE:** Here "disruptive" is from the perspective of VPA. As mentioned above, the container
runtime MAY choose to restart a container or pod as needed.

More on these two types of changes below.

### 1. Applying Updates During Pod Admission

For VPAs using the new `InPlaceOrRecreate` mode, the VPA Admission Controller will apply updates to

> starting pods just as it does for VPAs in `Initial`, `Auto`, and `Recreate` modes.

Reviewer: I'm not entirely sure if this AEP is the correct place to make this comment, but the promise of `Auto` was that it would one day support in-place, see https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/blob/78c8173b979316f892327022d53369760b000210/vertical-pod-autoscaler/docs/api.md#updatemode

We've been promising users that if they use Auto today, one day in the future the VPA will start resizing their pods for them without recreating them. 
It seems that this may not be the case since the container runtime can't guarantee it. 

Do we need to start thinking about what to do with Auto in the future?

Again, I'm unsure if this really fits into the context of this AEP, but I thought I'd bring it up.

Reviewer 3: My 2 cents on this are that, switching `Auto` to be `InPlace` or some variation of `InPlace` would be a breaking change that should be in something like VPA 2.0. It may not "break" someone's configuration, but the change probably won't be the same expected behaviour in VPA 0.x and 1.x when the updater was freely evicting pods in `Auto` mode. Although, what I'm talking about is probably a discussion for the future timeline of VPA in general.

Reviewer 5: Changing the behavior of Auto, good idea. Major version bump to accompany that, also a good idea.

Reviewer 6: With the discussion around changing the behavior of `auto`, we're talking about a future where in-place vertical scaling is GA and not under a feature gate, right? IMHO it would feel a bit weird to make the default behavior of VPA depend on a beta feature gate.

Reviewer: > With the discussion around changing the behavior of `auto`, we're talking about a future where in-place vertical scaling is GA and not under a feature gate, right?

Correct. Since the work on in-place is starting to happen now, and we are diverging on the promise given to users, it seems appropriate to discuss Auto now, just so it's considered in our discussions as we move forward with the in-place rollout.

Author: Specified in the AEP that the intention is that this eventually graduates into the `Auto` mode.

### 2. Applying Disruption-free Updates (**NEW**)

In the `InPlaceOrRecreate` mode when an update only changes resources for which a container
indicates that it doesn't require a restart, then VPA can attempt to actuate the change without
disrupting the pod. VPA Updater will:
* attempt to actuate such updates in place,
* attempt to actuate them if difference between recommendation and request is at least 10%
  * even if pod has been running for less than 12h,
* if necessary execute only partial updates (if some changes would require a restart).

If VPA updater fails to update the size of a container, we ignore the failure and try again. We
will not intentionally evict the pod unless the conditions call for a disruptive update (see
below).

### 3. Applying Disruptive Updates

> In the `InPlaceOrRecreate` modes VPA updater will attempt to apply updates that require container
> restart in place. It will update them under the same conditions that would trigger update with

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In the `InPlaceOrRecreate` modes, and for updates that require a container restart, the VPA updater will attempt to apply updates in place. It will update them under the same conditions that would trigger an update with
```

Author: Thank you. Done.

    recommendation or
  - At least one container has at least one resource request higher than the upper bound of the corresponding
    recommendation.

> - **NEW** Disruption-free update - doesn't change any resources for which the relevant container specifies

Author: Done, removed this.

### Test Plan

The following test scenarios will be added to e2e tests. The `InPlaceOrRecreate` mode will be
tested in the following scenarios:

* Admission controller applies recommendation to pod controlled by VPA. 
* Disruption-free in-place update applied to all containers of a pod (request in recommendation bounds).
* Partial disruption-free update applied to some containers of a pod, some disruptive changes skipped (request in
  recommendation bounds).
* Disruptive in-place update applied to all containers of a pod (request out ouf recommendation bounds). 
* Disruptive in-place update will fail. Pod should be evicted and the recommendation applied.
* Disruption free in-place updates fail, pod should not be evicted.

### Details still to consider

#### Careful with memory scale down

> Downsizing memory may have to be done slowly to prevent OOMs if application starts to allocate rapidly.

Reviewer 3: Should we want to mention here that this will apparently always restart the container?

Author: This is indeed a KEP detail and I've added it, thanks!
